---
layout: post
title:  "EAS Sessions at AAA 2012"
date:   2012-09-01
---
 
The 2012 annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association will be held November 14-18, 2012 in San Francisco, CA. The conference theme is “Borders and Crossings.” Information about the meeting is available on the AAA website.

Please note: The EAS Board Meeting (for board members only) is on Friday 11/16 from 2-3p in Marina. The EAS Business Meeting (open to all EAS members) is on Saturday 11/17 from 6:15-8:30p at Union Square 17-18. This information was not initially released by AAA and is not available in the online scheduler, so please spread the word!

This year, EAS was very successful in having a large number of sessions scheduled for the AAA meeting. All EAS sessions are scheduled on Thursday, 11/15 and Saturday, 11/17. The schedule of EAS sessions is as follows, with links for further information on the AAA website.

# Thursday, November 15, 2012

8:00 AM-9:45 AM Thursday
CULTURAL TRANSMISSION STUDIES: TREE AND NETWORK MODELS OF MICRO- AND MACROEVOLUTION
Hilton San Francisco: Golden Gate 3

10:15 AM-12:00 PM Thursday
EVOLUTIONARY UNDERSTANDINGS OF CULTURAL PRACTICES
Hilton San Francisco: Golden Gate 3

1:45 PM-3:30 PM Thursday
EVOLUTIONARY INSIGHTS INTO CHILDHOOD, PARENTING, AND COOPERATION
Hilton San Francisco: Golden Gate 3

4:00 PM-5:45 PM Thursday
CURRENT ISSUES IN BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY
Hilton San Francisco: Golden Gate 3

# Saturday, November 17, 2012

10:15 AM-12:00 PM Saturday
EVOLUTIONARY ANTHROPOLOGY POSTER SESSION
Hilton San Francisco: Poster Row Blue

1:45 PM-3:30 PM Saturday
THE BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY OF MODERNIZATION
Invited Session:  Dawn B Neill, Siobhan M Mattison and Mary K Shenk
Hilton San Francisco: Golden Gate 2

4:00 PM-5:45 PM Saturday
CURRENT THEMES IN EVOLUTIONARY ANTHROPOLOGY: DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION, COOPERATION, AND CULTURAL TRANSMISSION
Invited Session:  Adam H Boyette and Eric A Smith
Hilton San Francisco: Golden Gate 2

We look forward to seeing you in San Francisco!